[MUSIC]
In this lecture we'll start talking about
some of the debug environments that exist.
Really a couple of debug
environments that are commonly used.
Arduino won't give us access
to these environments.
But it's sort of important for
making IOT devices in general that
you understand some of
these debug environments.
Because if you're gonna make some bigger
ones, you're gonna use some of these.
So remote debugger,
this is a common type of environment.
You could see there are basically
two components is a host.
Host computer up there, there's a target.
The target is the target
platform that we're dealing with.
So, in our case that
would be the Arduino or
whatever whatever board
we want to work with.
So, the host computer is where
you as a user, as a programmer.
Actually interface with
the debugging environment.
So, you are using the typing
debug commands into the host.
Those are getting transmitted
to the target over some kind of
communication link.
So the frontend is running on the host
that you, the programmer, are accessing.
Now, there's a debug monitor,
some code, hidden on the target.
I say hidden,
hidden like a bootloader, okay?
It's on the target, so
there it has to be a debug monitor code
that's running on the platform.
On the Arduino, lets say.
So it's typically triggered
when some debug event occurs.
So debug event,
there are a lot of possible debug events.
One debug event is a break point,
let's say.
You set a break point, say at the host,
you said okay break on line 23,
you select that.
And then you run the code, and
when line 23 happens, the target stops.
It recognizes the debug event and
it stops, and then it stops running.
And then it goes back to the host and
lets the host have control again.
So that's a typical debug event.
Often the host program,
the front end will have some kind of
a way you can force a debug event.
You hit Ctrl+C, let's say,
or click on a button,
the Stop button, in a GUI built on a host.
And then that sends a command to the
target to stop execution at that point.
So you get a Debug Monitor.
And the Debug Monitor is the code
running on the target that's talking
to the host, okay.
So there's a communication going on
between the target and the host.
And that communication has to be managed
by some code running on the target.
So that Code running on
the target is the debug monitor.
And it will stop execution
of the code on the target.
It will monitor the communication
link to see commands from the host.
It'll also provides debug
information to the host.
So for instance, if the host you type,
at the host you type print
the contents of variable X.
That command will be sent over
the communication interface and
then the debug monitor will receive it.
Will retrieve the value of x and
send it back over the communication link.
So the host front-end is actually
talking to this debug monitor.
Which is running on your Arduino, but
along with whatever the actual code is,
the functional code, the application code.
There's a debug monitor
running in the background.
All right, hitting a breakpoint,
receiving a request from the host,
these are the type of things
that are debug events.
That typically cause the execution
of the target to stop and
allow interaction with the host.
All right, and the monitor
maintains a communication link.
The monitor and
the host together maintain that link.
So, advantages of this type of set up.
So, you get good run control.
[SOUND] You can stop,
you can set breakpoints to stop
execution when you want to.
You can actually force execution to
stop from the host, you hit a button and
it'll send the command to stop execution.
So, you get good run control.
The monitor can alter memory and
registers.
All right, so the debug monitor is
code that's running on the Arduino.
Since it's running on the Arduino,
it has direct access to the registers and
the memory on the Arduino.
So now with the debug monitor,
you can actually control the registers.
You have control ability of the registers
and the memory on the Arduino.
And also you can read it,
you have observability of those too.
Perfect functional accuracy,
so by that I mean.
That the code when it executes,
will run exactly the way it
would on a real target platform.
Because it is running on
a real target platform.
So you get perfect functional accuracy,
unlike say you had a simulator or
something like that.
You don't have to worry
about functional accuracy.
Disadvantages.
So these debug interrupts,
these debug events that
allow interaction with the host,
those things alter the timing.
They stop, mess with the timing,
they stop the execution of the target,
altering the timing.
And so you can't get real time
monitoring using a system like this.
So, depending on how important timing
is to you, this may or may not work.
This may or may not be sufficient.
Now even for timing critical systems,
using a remote debug setup
is a good idea at first.
But eventually you need
to test the timing too so
this type of setup wouldn't be as useful.
And you need a spare communication
channel, so the host and
the target are speaking over
some communication channel.
So you need an extra
communication channel,
one that's not being used functionally.
So if the application is
already using the ethernet.
The programs using it for
whatever the application is.
Then you can't use or,
not that you can't, but
you have a difficult time using
the ethernet also for debugging.
Now, it turns that you can share
the ethernet for both, but if you do that,
then whenever the debugging information
is going over the ethernet pack,
over the ethernet connection.
Then, functional data can't be going
over the ethernet connection, right?
So, there's a tradeoff.
And it can slow the machine down and
so on.
So, you need some spare internet, some
spare connection, which we fortunately
have within Arduino UR serial connection
is what we are gonna to use, and
we'll talk about that later.
Oh, another thing is that you would like
to have the program in RAM in order to add
the breakpoints.
So, this has to do with how
software breakpoints are added.
You know in Arduino,
the program is generally in flash.
It's resident in flash and
executed out of the flash memory.
But, you would like to have it in RAM,
because flash is slow to reprogram and
RAM is fast.
You can reprogram flash,
but it takes a long time.
You have to, relatively long time.
When I say long time, I mean it's
milliseconds, okay a long time.
Lots of milliseconds, that's slow.
So you would like it to be in ram
because whenever you set a break point.
I don't want to go into
the details of this, but
when you set a breakpoint you have
to alter the code temporarily.
You go to the place, the liner, the code
where the breakpoints gonna be, and
you change that instruction.
To something else temporarily in order to
set it to stop the code at that point.
So, you need to be able to change the code
relatively quickly in order
to set these breakpoints.
And flash makes that harder.
Okay, so another way to go.
Which is more common in modern processors,
is become common,
is the use of an embedded debug interface.
So what this is, you see this
in modern processors nowadays.
You have embedded debug logic.
Debug logic that's actually
built in to the processor.
So inside the processor or
the microcontroller, in addition to all
the logic that actually executes the code.
They put debug logic hardware that
actually does debug activities.
They build it right in, so you don't have
to have a debug monitor anymore, right.
The debug monitor was a program that
runs on your arduino, let's say.
This is saying look, forget the program.
We're gonna put hardware in there
that does those functions directly.
Which makes it faster,
also makes it possible to do in parallel.
It's efficient, it costs a little bit,
because it costs area on the chip, right?
The chip has to get bigger to
accommodate the extra logic that you're
embedding in there.
But it's a useful feature, and
it's getting more and more common.
Because space is relatively
cheap on a chip.
So typically it's
an option like the block.
In the initial property block
off a piece of hardware you
can add to the chip design.
There are several embedded
trace macrocell from ARMs.
The ARM processors, they have embedded
trace macrocells, which are the name for
their debug logic or, for
some part of their debug logic,
they have several trace macrocells.
But embedded trace
macrocells the main one.
Freescale uses background debug mode,
which is a similar idea.
Debug logic is permanently
built into the processor.
So, what that means is that logic,
since it's debug logic generally is
used when you're developing the system.
But once you manufacture the system and
you sell it.
That logic seems wasted,
it's not using but not being used, right,
because you're not generally
debugging it out in the field.
Now you could, but
that is much less common.
So that logic, this is why somehow
it seems like a waste sometimes,
because you say,
well I'm using that logic.
I'm paying more to build this chip
with this extra debug logic, but
in the field it's never used.
That's true, it's not a waste though
because debug cost's a lot of money.
And anything that can speed that and
make that cheaper is not a waste.
A few dedicated pins have to be added.
So this debug information that is
extracted by this embedded debug logic.
It has to be sent to, say,
a host machine, right, that the user
is interfacing with, is using.
So in order to do that,
you need some pins to send that data.
And that's important,
the pins are precious, right.
There aren't that many pins on a chip.
Even a very densely packed
chip has a lot of pins.
Compared to the amount of logic inside
the chip, there are very few pins.
So, pins are precious.
So, you don't wanna use too many
pins just for debugging purposes.
But these debug interfaces
require a certain number of pins.
Usually they transfer data serially,
so they need very few pins, but
they do need a few pins
dedicated to debug.
So here are some of the debug and
trace features you would expect
to find in embedded debug logic.
Break points, the ability to set
break points inside your code.
Watch points, where what happens is
it It's sort of like a break point.
It's at a certain point in code,
let's say or a memory location.
If some event happens
then it stops the code.
So maybe if you write to a particular
memory location then it stops.
It's every time you write, it'll check and
if you write to this location
then it stops the code.
On the fly memory access.
So you're gonna access
the memory locations at runtime
without stopping the code.
That you can observe the memory locations.
You can read them and observe them.
You can change process and value so change
register values and things like this.
Single step through the codes is one step
at a time, one instruction at a time.
Which allows you to basically find grain
one control so execute one instruction,
check the value, execute the next
instruction, check the value.
And you can zero in on exactly
when the value is going wrong.
You can export exceptions to debugger, so
when you hit a watchpoint it can go to
debugger logic and start running
debug logic if you want it to.
You can export software generated data.
So, what that means is
actually we're gonna be doing,
this will actually be doing
something just like this.
You can basically allow that
the person who writes the code
running on your target.
They can put print statements,
effectively print statements, which send
data from the processor to the host.
So you can basically add
error messages manually.
You can say, oh, this error has happened
now, and it'll be sent on the wires,
whatever the communication interface is.
It'll be sent to the host, and
the person debugging can see the messages.
And that can be helpful.
Timestamp information for each event so
you can trace the events.
So when events happen like certain
interesting things happen a memory access
happens or something like that.
You can send a timestamp and
say look this memory access happened at
this time this happened at that time.
Sometimes in timing critical
situations timing critical systems.
You wanna know exactly when things happen
and the time separation between events.
So the hardware that you add for
debug can add that timestamp and
send it to the host.
An instruction trace,
you get a special purpose hardware
that tells you which instructions
were executed in what sequence.
So this is very useful sometimes.
If you know something crashed.
You want to see what happened
that led up to that crash.
You'd like to see a trace, the list
of instructions that were executed.
So you can follow it back and
sort of guess at which instruction or
which set of instructions
might have caused that crash.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]